El Salvador is a member of the United Nations and several of its specialized agencies, the Organization of American States (OAS), the Central American Common Market (CACM), the Central American Parliament (PARLACEN), and the Central American Integration System (SICA). It actively participates in the Central American Security Commission (CASC), which seeks to promote regional arms control.

El Salvador also is a member of the World Trade Organization and is pursuing regional free trade agreements. An active participant in the Summit of the Americas process, El Salvador chairs a working group on market access under the Free Trade Area of the Americas initiative.

El Salvador has joined its six Central American neighbors in signing the Alliance for Sustainable Development, known as the Conjunta Centroamerica-USA or CONCAUSA to promote sustainable economic development in the region.

Bilateral relations

 (Taiwan)
El Salvador maintains official diplomatic relations with the Republic of China (Taiwan) instead of the People's Republic of China. President Salvador Sanchez Ceren in his campaign reafirmed that he will not restrict and will not break its diplomatic ties with Taiwan. On the recent visit of President Ma Ying-jeou to El Salvador, Sanchez Ceren described Ma's visit as evidence of the consolidation of the long period official diplomatic relations between El Salvador and Taiwan and both nations signed a joint communique in with they recognize that both nations and its peoples respect the fundamental human rights. Sanchez Ceren announced that El Salvador will strengthen its official diplomatic relations with Taiwan. Sanchez Ceren said that president Ma's visit: "Represents the consolidation of a long and fruitful diplomatic relations, friendship and cooperation, which has experienced through the years an intense process of rapprochement, of which the most vulnerable sectors of our society have been most favored".

It also means "the consolidation of shared vision of brotherhood between two peoples promoters of peace, solidarity and respect for fundamental human rights".

Ceren also said that: President Ma arrives in our country in a very important moment, because we are starting a presidential run has among its major commitments to strengthen the social and economic transformations that need to El Salvador, which will enable present and future generations enjoy a renovated country more just, equitable and broad opportunities, "he said to the press after concluding a working meeting with the Asian dignitary.


Cuba and El Salvador have resumed diplomatic relations on June 1, 2009. El Salvador previously suspended diplomatic relations with Cuba 50 years ago due to the Cuban Revolution. The diplomatic ties have started after El Salvador's new president Mauricio Funes has been sworn into office, and pledged to re-establish diplomatic relations with Cuba. El Salvador is also the very last Latin American nation to do so. 



In July 1969, El Salvador and Honduras fought the 100-hour Football War over disputed border areas and friction resulting from the 300,000 Salvadorans who had emigrated to Honduras in search of land and employment. The catalyst was nationalistic feelings aroused by a series of soccer matches between the two countries. The two countries formally signed a peace treaty on October 30, 1980, which put the border dispute before the International Court of Justice. In September 1992, the court issued a 400-page ruling, awarding much of the disputed land to Honduras. Although there have been tensions between citizens on both sides of the border, the two countries have worked to maintain stability and signed an agreement in November 1996 to establish a framework for negotiating the final disposition of citizens and property in the affected areas. El Salvador and Honduras share normal diplomatic and trade relations.

The Honduras-El Salvador Border Protocol ratified by Honduras in May 1999 established a framework for a long-delayed border demarcation, which is currently underway; with respect to the maritime boundary in the Golfo de Fonseca, the International Court of Justice referred to the line determined by the 1900 Honduras-Nicaragua Mixed Boundary Commission and advised that some tripartite resolution among El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua likely would be required.



*El Salvador officially recognised Kosovo as an independent sovereign state on 29 June 2013.
*El Salvador and Kosovo established official diplomatic relations on 18 October 2014.



Diplomatic relations between Mexico and El Salvador were established in 1838.
* Mexico has an embassy in San Salvador.
* El Salvador has an embassy in Mexico City and consulates-general in Monterrey, Tapachula and Veracruz City.
*Both countries are members of the Organization of American States and the Organization of Ibero-American States.


At present both currently do not have diplomatic relations with each other.


El Salvador, which is home to a sizable ethnic Palestinian community, was widely expected to join the succession of South American governments that recognised Palestine in the end of 2010. In May 2011, members of the country's Legislative Assembly including its president Sigfrido Reyes presented a proposal to the Cabinet to issue a statement formally recognising the State of Palestine.

The Central American Integration System (SICA) was expected to adopt a co-ordinated position on the issue at its summit in San Salvador on 18 August. However, El Salvador, as the nation presiding over the summit, refused to include the matter on the official agenda, insisting that discussion should retain a regional focus. Despite this, the government officially recognised the Palestinian state on 25 August. 

This recognition notably took place at a time when there was no Israeli Ambassador present, since Ambassador Mattanya Cohen had left his post after the end of his four year term.


El Salvador established diplomatic relation with Russia on 1992 after the end of the Salvadoran Civil War and after the end of the cold war. Russian Federation foreign minister Sergei Lavrov visited El Salvador and since then legislative visits of legislative even from anti-narcotics cooperation have been accomplished. El Salvador has benefited with the selling of Russian tractors and Russian vans. 


El Salvador recognized the SADR on July 31, 1989. On April 1997, El Salvador cancelled relations with the SADR. On June 2009, and during a visit of SADR's president, Mohamed Abdelaziz, relations were restored. On November 30, 2010, the SADR and El Salvador upgrade their relations to ambassadorial level.


* El Salvador has an embassy in Madrid and a consulate-general in Barcelona.
* Spain has an embassy in San Salvador.




U.S. policy towards the country promotes the strengthening of El Salvador's democratic institutions, rule of law, judicial reform, and civilian police; national reconciliation and reconstruction; and economic opportunity and growth. El Salvador has been a committed member of the coalition of nations fighting against terrorism and has sent 10 rotations of troops to support the Iraq War.
www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/2033.htm
* El Salvador has an embassy in Washington, DC and has several consulates-general scattered about the country.
* United States has an embassy in San Salvador, the embassy in hand is considered to be one of the biggest American embassies in the world.

Illicit drugs
El Salvador is a transshipment point for cocaine; cannabis produced for local consumption; domestic drug use on the rise.

