Like its Eastern Caribbean neighbors, the main priority of Dominica's foreign relations is economic development. The country maintains missions in Washington, New York, London, and Brussels and is represented jointly with other Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) members in Canada. Dominica is also a member of the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB), and the Commonwealth of Nations. It became a member of the United Nations and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in 1978 and of the World Bank and Organization of American States (OAS) in 1979.

As a member of CARICOM, in July 1994 Dominica strongly backed efforts by the United States to implement United Nations Security Council Resolution 940, designed to facilitate the departure of Haiti's de facto authorities from power. The country agreed to contribute personnel to the multinational force, which restored the democratically elected government of Haiti in October 1994.

In May 1997, Prime Minister James joined 14 other Caribbean leaders, and President Clinton, during the first-ever U.S.-regional summit in Bridgetown, Barbados. The summit strengthened the basis for regional cooperation on justice and counternarcotics issues, finance and development, and trade. Dominica previously maintained official relations with the Republic of China (commonly known as "Taiwan") instead of the People's Republic of China, but on 23 March 2004, a joint communique was signed in Beijing, paving the way for diplomatic recognition of the People's Republic. Beijing responded to Dominica's severing relations with the Republic of China by giving them a $12 million aid package, which includes $6 million in budget support for the year 2004 and $1 million annually for six years.

Dominica is also a member of the International Criminal Court with a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the US-military (as covered under Article 98).

International disputes

Dominica claims Venezuelan controlled Isla Aves.

Bilateral relations
 Country Formal relations began Notes

Bilateral relations are described as "close and friendly."
Canada is represented in Dominica, through its high commission in Barbados.

Diplomatic relations were established on 31 March 2004, when Dominica suspended ties with the Republic of China.

In December 2005, during the second CARICOM/CUBA summit held in Barbados, heads of CARICOM and Cuba agreed to deepen their ties in the areas of socio-economic and political cooperation in addition to medical care assistance. Since the meeting, Cuba has opened four additional embassies in the Caribbean Community including Dominica.

Denmark is represented in Dominica, through its embassy in Mexico.

France is represented in Dominica, through its embassy in Saint Lucia. Dominica and France have signed many bilateral agreements.

Guyana has a High Commission in Roseau.

Since 1979, the bilateral relations have been cordial and fruitful.


Dominica recognised the State of Palestine and established diplomatic relations on 14 September 2011.

Sweden has an honorary consulate in Roseau.

Diplomatic relations between Dominica and the UAE were established on 21 December 2014.


On 3 November 1978, Dominica received independence from the United Kingdom.

The United States and Dominica have friendly relations. United States supports the Dominican government's efforts to expand its economic base and to provide a higher standard of living for its citizens. U.S. assistance is primarily channeled through multilateral agencies such as the World Bank and the Caribbean Development Bank, as well as through the U.S. Agency for International Development office in Bridgetown, Barbados.

President of Venezuela Hugo Chávez visited Dominica in 2007.
Dominica claims Venezuelan island Isla Aves.

Dominica and the Commonwealth of Nations

Dominica has been a member of the Commonwealth of Nations since 1978, when it became an independent Commonwealth republic.

Despite being a republic, Dominica's highest court is the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London.

