The Government of Barbados (GoB), is headed by the monarch, Queen Elizabeth II as Head of State. Since 1 June 2012, the Queen has been represented by the Governor-General, Sir Elliott Belgrave, G.C.M.G., K.A. 

The country has a bicameral legislature and a political party system, based on universal adult suffrage and fair elections. The Senate has 21 members, all appointed by the Governor-General on behalf of the monarch, 12 on the advice of the Prime Minister, two on the advice of the Leader of the Opposition, and seven in the Governor-General’s sole discretion. The House of Assembly has 30 members, all elected. Both houses debate all legislation. However, the House of Assembly may ultimately override Senate's rejection of money bills and other bills except bills amending the Constitution.

Officers of each house (President and Deputy President of the Senate; Speaker, Deputy Speaker, and Chairman of Committees of the Assembly) are elected from the members of the respective houses. 

In keeping with the Westminster system of governance, Barbados has evolved into am independent parliamentary democracy and Constitutional monarchy, meaning that all political power rests with the Parliament under a non-political monarch as head of state, which allows stability. Executive authority is vested in the monarch, who normally acts only on the advice of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, who are collectively responsible to Parliament. Barbadian law is rooted in English common law, and the Constitution of Barbados implemented in 1966, is the supreme law of the land.

Fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual are set out in the Constitution and are protected by a strict legal code.

The Cabinet is headed by the Prime Minister, who must be an elected member of Parliament, and other ministers are appointed from either chamber by the Governor-General, as advised by the Prime Minister. 

The Governor-General appoints as Leader of the Opposition the member of House of Assembly who commands the support of the largest number of members of that House in opposition to the ruling party's government. 

The maximum duration of a Parliament is five years from the first sitting. There is a simultaneous dissolution of both Houses of Parliament by the Governor-General, acting on the advice of the Prime Minister. 

There is an established non-political civil service. Also, there are separate constitutional commissions for the Judicial and Legal Service, the Public Service, and the Police Service.

History
The government has been chosen by elections since 1961 elections, when Barbados achieved full self-governance. Before then, the government was a Crown colony consisting of either colonial administration solely (such as the Executive Council), or a mixture of colonial rule and a partially elected assembly, such as the Legislative Council. Since Independence, the Barbados Labour Party (BLP) governed from 1976 to 1986, and from September 1994 – 2008. The Democratic Labour Party (DLP) held office 1966 to 1976, from 1986 to 1994, and has formed the Government January 2008 to present.

 Executive branch 
The Prime Minister and Cabinet are appointed from the political party which gains a simple majority in the general elections held in Barbados. These elections constitutionally must be held no longer than every five years apart; however, elections can be called whenever the Government chooses to seek a new mandate or loses a vote of no confidence in Parliament.

 Ministries 

 edit table Portfolio Minister Prime Minister of Barbados Head of the Cabinet of Barbados The Hon. Freundel Stuart Prime Minister's Office Sen. The Hon. Darcy Boyce Office of the Attorney General The Hon. Adriel Brathwaite Ministry of Agriculture, Food, Fisheries, Industry and Small Business Development Dr. The Hon. David Estwick Ministry of Commerce and Trade Sen. The Hon. Haynesley Benn Ministry of Drainage, Water Resource Management and the Environment Dr. The Hon. Denis Lowe Ministry of Education and Human Resources Development The Hon. Ronald D. Jones Ministry of Family, Culture, Sports and Youth The Hon. Stephen Lashley Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs The Hon. Christopher Sinckler Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade Sen. The Hon. Maxine McClean Ministry of Health The Hon. Donville Inniss Ministry of Home Affairs The Hon. Adriel Brathwaite Ministry of Housing, Lands, Urban and Rural Development The Hon. Patrick M. T. Todd Ministry of International Transport and International Business The Hon. George Hutson Ministry of Labour Dr. The Hon. Esther Byer-Suckoo Ministry of Social Care, Constituency Empowerment and Community Development The Hon. Steven D. Blackett Minister Of State The Hon. Patrick M. T. Todd Ministry of Tourism The Hon. Richard L. Sealy Ministry of Transport and Works The Hon. John D. E. Boyce

Judicial Branch 

Barbados' Courts include the Magistrates' Court, High Court, and Court of Appeal. It is also a member of the Caribbean Court of Justice, and allows some appeals to the Inter-American Court of Human Rights.

Perception
Transparency International ranked Barbados as 17th place (of 179) in the world on its corruption perceptions index in 2010, with only 1 nation scoring better in the Americas. (www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/2010/results)

