Charlize Theron is a South African and American actress, producer and fashion model. She starred in early films in the late 1990s, such as The Devil's Advocate (1997), Mighty Joe Young (1998) and The Cider House Rules (1999). Theron received critical acclaim for her portrayal of serial killer Aileen Wuornos in Monster (2003), for which she won the Academy Award, Silver Bear, Golden Globe Award and Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actress among several other accolades, becoming the first South African to win an Academy Award in a major acting category. She received further Academy Award and Golden Globe Award nominations for her performance in the sexual harassment-themed drama North Country in 2005 and a Golden Globe Award nomination for her performance in Jason Reitman's 2011 comedy-drama Young Adult.

Theron became a U.S. citizen in 2007, while retaining her South African citizenship. In the late 2000s, she moved into the field of producing, both in television and film. In 2006, she produced the documentary East of Havana. In 2008, she starred in The Burning Plain and served as an executive producer. In 2014, she produced and starred in Dark Places. In 2012, she played Queen Ravenna in Snow White and the Huntsman and Meredith Vickers in Prometheus, both of which were box office successes.

Early life
Theron was born in Benoni, in the then-Transvaal Province of South Africa, the only child of Gerda (née Maritz) and Charles Theron (born 27 November 1947). Second Boer War figure Danie Theron was her great-great-uncle. Her ancestry includes French, German, and Dutch persons; her French forebears were early Huguenot settlers in South Africa. "Theron" is an Occitan surname (originally spelled Théron) pronounced in Afrikaans as , although she has said that the way she pronounces it in South Africa is θron. She changed the pronunciation when she moved to the U.S. to give it a more "American" sound.

She grew up on her parents' farm in Benoni, near Johannesburg. On 21 June 1991, Theron's father, an alcoholic, physically attacked her mother and threatened both her mother and her while drunk; Theron's mother then shot and killed him. The shooting was legally adjudged to have been self-defence and her mother faced no charges.

Theron attended Putfontein Primary School (Laerskool Putfontein), a period she later characterised as not "fitting in". At 13, Theron was sent to boarding school and began her studies at the National School of the Arts in Johannesburg. Although Theron is fluent in English, her first language is Afrikaans.

Career

Early work
Although seeing herself as a dancer, Theron at 16 won a one-year modeling contract at a local competition in Salerno and with her mother moved to Milan, Italy. After Theron spent a year modeling throughout Europe, she and her mother moved to New York City and Miami, Florida. In New York, she attended the Joffrey Ballet School, where she trained as a ballet dancer until a knee injury closed this career path. As Theron recalled in 2008,



At 19, Theron flew to Los Angeles, on a one-way ticket her mother bought her, intending now to work in the film industry. During her early months there, she went to a Hollywood Boulevard bank to cash a check her mother had sent her to help with the rent. When the teller refused to cash it, Theron engaged in a shouting match with him. Upon seeing this, talent agent John Crosby, in line behind her, handed her his business card and subsequently introduced her to casting agents and also an acting school. She later fired him as her manager after he kept sending her scripts for films similar to Showgirls and Species. After several months in the city, she made her film debut with a non-speaking role in the horror film Children of the Corn III: Urban Harvest (1995). Her first speaking role was a supporting but significant and attention-garnering part as a hitwoman in 2 Days in the Valley (1996). Larger roles in widely released Hollywood films followed, and her career expanded in the late 1990s with box-office successes like The Devil's Advocate (1997), Mighty Joe Young (1998), and The Cider House Rules (1999). She was on the cover of the January 1999 issue of Vanity Fair as the "White Hot Venus". She also appeared on the cover of the May 1999 issue of Playboy magazine. However, the nude photos inside the issue had been taken several years earlier before she became famous and Theron unsuccessfully sued the magazine for publishing the photos without her consent.

Success and hiatus
She starred in four films in 2000 – Reindeer Games, The Yards, The Legend of Bagger Vance and Men of Honor – and was briefly considered a new "It girl". Theron has said of this period in her career that, "I kept finding myself in a place where directors would back me but studios didn't. I began a love affair with directors, the ones I really, truly admired. I found myself making really bad movies, too. Reindeer Games was not a good movie, but I did it because I loved John Frankenheimer."

After appearing in other films, Theron starred as serial killer Aileen Wuornos in Monster (2003). Film critic Roger Ebert called it "one of the greatest performances in the history of the cinema". For her role, she won the Academy Award for Best Actress at the 76th Academy Awards in February 2004, as well as the Screen Actors Guild Award and the Golden Globe Award. She is the first South African to win an Oscar for Best Actress. The Oscar win pushed her to The Hollywood Reporter's 2006 list of highest-paid actresses in Hollywood; earning US$10 million for both her subsequent films, North Country and Aeon Flux, she ranked seventh, behind Halle Berry, Cameron Diaz, Drew Barrymore, Renée Zellweger, Reese Witherspoon and Nicole Kidman. AskMen also named her the number one most desirable woman of 2003.

In 2005, Theron portrayed Rita, Michael Bluth's (Jason Bateman) love interest, on the third season of Fox's critically acclaimed television series Arrested Development. She also received Golden Globe Award and Primetime Emmy Award nominations for her role of Britt Ekland in the 2004 HBO film The Life and Death of Peter Sellers. On 30 September, Theron received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. In the same year, she starred in the financially unsuccessful science fiction thriller Aeon Flux. She also received the 2005 Spike Video Game Award for Best Performance by a Human Female for her voiceover work in the Aeon Flux video game.

Theron received Best Actress Academy Award and Golden Globe Award nominations for her lead performance in the drama North Country. Ms. magazine also honoured her for this performance with a feature article in its Fall 2005 issue. She was supposed to star in the screen adaption of the short story The Ice at the Bottom of the World by Mark Richard, and it was to be directed by Kimberly Peirce and produced by Theron's company Denver and Delilah Films (Theron's two dog's names). Theron has owned the rights for many years. She was also supposed to star in a movie adaption of the graphic novel Jinx, but neither project has been produced yet.

In 2008, Theron was named the Hasty Pudding Theatricals Woman of the Year. That year she also starred with Will Smith in the superhero film Hancock, and in late 2008 she was asked to be a UN Messenger of Peace by the UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon.

In October 2009, Theron was cast to star in a sequel to the Mad Max films, titled Mad Max: Fury Road.

On 4 December 2009, Theron co-presented the draw for the 2010 FIFA World Cup in Cape Town, South Africa, accompanied by several other celebrities of South African nationality or ancestry. During rehearsals she drew an Ireland ball instead of France as a joke at the expense of FIFA, referring to Thierry Henry's handball controversy in the play-off match between France and Ireland. The stunt alarmed FIFA enough for it to fear she might do it again in front of a live global audience.

Recent work
Following a three-year hiatus from the big screen, Theron returned to the spotlight in 2011 with Young Adult. Directed by Jason Reitman, the film earned critical acclaim especially for Theron's performance. She was nominated for a Golden Globe Award and several other high profile awards. Theron played the Wicked Queen in the film Snow White & the Huntsman, which began production in 2011 and was released in 2012.

In 2011, she described her process for becoming the characters in her film:


In 2012, she starred in Ridley Scott's science fiction film Prometheus. On 7 February 2013 it was announced that Theron was cast as Libby Day, the lead character in the film adaptation of the Gillian Flynn novel Dark Places. The film is to be directed by Gilles Paquet-Brenner, and Theron will also have a producer credit.

In 2013, Vulture/NYMag named her the 68th Most Valuable Star in Hollywood saying: "We’re just happy that Theron can stay on the list in a year when she didn’t come out with anything ... any actress who’s got that kind of skill, beauty, and ferocity ought to have a permanent place in Hollywood."

Other ventures

Activism
The Charlize Theron Africa Outreach Project (CTAOP) was created in 2007 by Theron, Academy Award winning actor and UN Messenger of Peace, in an effort to support African youth in the fight against HIV/AIDS. CTAOP's mission is to help keep African youth safe from HIV/AIDS. The project is committed to supporting community-engaged organizations that address the key drivers of the disease. Although the geographic scope of CTAOP is Sub-Saharan Africa, the primary concentration has mostly been Charlize's home country of South Africa. CTAOP's approach is based on the belief that community-based organizations on the ground understand the social and structural relationships of their communities better than anyone. By supporting these organizations through grant giving, networking, and spotlighting their work, CTAOP enables communities to mobilize and empower themselves to prevent HIV.

In 2008, Theron was named a United Nations Messenger of Peace. In his citation, Ban Ki-Moon said of Theron "You have consistently dedicated yourself to improving the lives of women and children in South Africa, and to preventing and stopping violence against women and girls." She recorded a public service announcement in 2014 as part of their Stop Rape Now program.

In December 2009, CTAOP and TOMS Shoes partnered to create a limited edition unisex shoe. The shoe was made from vegan materials and inspired by the African baobab tree, the silhouette of which was embroidered on blue and orange canvas. Ten-thousand pairs were given to destitute children, and a portion of the proceeds went to CTAOP.

Theron is involved in women's rights organizations and has marched in pro-choice rallies. Theron also is a supporter of animal rights and active member of PETA. She appeared in a PETA ad for its anti-fur campaign.

Theron is a supporter of same-sex marriage and attended a march and rally to support that in Fresno, California, on 30 May 2009. She has publicly stated that she refuses to get married until same sex marriage is legal in the United States. Theron commented on the subject matter, saying: "I don't want to get married because right now the institution of marriage feels very one-sided, and I want to live in a country where we all have equal rights. I think it would be exactly the same if we were married, but for me to go through that kind of ceremony, because I have so many friends who are gays and lesbians who would so badly want to get married, that I wouldn't be able to sleep with myself." Theron further elaborated on her stance in a June 2011 interview on Piers Morgan Tonight. She stated: "I do have a problem with the fact that our government hasn't stepped up enough to make this federal, to make gay marriage legal. I think everybody has that right."

In March 2014, CTAOP was among the charities that benefited from the annual Fame and Philanthropy fundraising event on the night of the 86th Academy Awards. Theron was an honored guest along with Halle Berry and keynote speaker James Cameron.

Endorsements
Having signed a deal with John Galliano in 2004, Theron replaced Estonian model Tiiu Kuik as the spokeswoman in the "J'adore" advertisements by Christian Dior. From October 2005 to December 2006, Theron earned US$3 million for the use of her image in a worldwide print media advertising campaign for Raymond Weil watches. In February 2006, she and her loan-out corporation were sued by Weil for breach of contract. The lawsuit was settled on 4 November 2008.

Personal life
Theron has a son, Jackson, whose adoption was announced in March 2012. She lives in Los Angeles. Theron became a naturalised citizen of the United States in May 2007, while retaining her South African citizenship.

In the mid-1990s, Theron had a two-year relationship with actor Craig Bierko. From 1997 to 2001, she dated Third Eye Blind frontman Stephan Jenkins. Theron then began a relationship with Irish actor Stuart Townsend, with whom she starred in Trapped (2002) and Head in the Clouds (2004). Theron and Townsend separated in January 2010 after nearly nine years together. Since early 2014, she has been dating actor Sean Penn.

Health concerns
While filming Aeon Flux in Berlin, Germany, Theron suffered a herniated disc in her neck, caused by a fall while filming a series of back handsprings. It required her to wear a neck brace for a month. In July 2009, she was diagnosed with a serious stomach virus, thought to be contracted while traveling overseas. While filming The Road, Theron injured her vocal cords during the labour screaming scenes.

Filmography
+ Film Year Title Role Notes 1995 Children of the Corn III: Urban Harvest Young Woman Uncredited 1996 2 Days in the Valley Helga Svelgen 1996 That Thing You Do! Tina Powers 1997 Trial and Error Billie Tyler 1997 ' Mary Ann Lomax 1998 Celebrity Supermodel 1998 Mighty Joe Young Jill Young 1999 ' Jillian Armacost 1999 ' Candy Kendall 2000 Reindeer Games Ashley Mercer 2000 ' Erica Stoltz 2000 ' Adele Invergordon 2000 Men of Honor Gwen Sunday 2001 Sweet November Sara Deever 2001 ' Laura Kensington 2001 15 Minutes Rose Heam 2002 Trapped Karen Jennings 2002 Waking Up in Reno Candy Kirkendall 2003 ' Stella Bridger 2003 Monster Aileen Wuornos 2004 ' Britt Ekland 2004 Head in the Clouds Gilda Bessé 2005 North Country Josey Aimes 2005 ' Aeon Flux Also in the video game 2007 In the Valley of Elah Det. Emily Sanders 2008 Sleepwalking Joleen Reedy Also producer 2008 Hancock Mary Embrey 2008 Battle in Seattle Ella 2009 ' Sylvia 2009 ' Wife 2009 Astro Boy Narrator Voice 2011 Young Adult Mavis Gary 2012 Snow White and the Huntsman Queen Ravenna 2012 Prometheus Meredith Vickers 2014 A Million Ways to Die in the West Anna 2015 Dark Places Libby Day Post-production2015 Mad Max: Fury Road Imperator Furiosa Post-production2015 The Last Face Filming 2016 Kubo and the Two Strings 
+ Television Year Title Role Notes 1997 Hollywood Confidential Sally Movie 2005 Arrested Development Rita (Mr.F) 5 episodes 2006 Robot Chicken Daniel's Mom / Mother / Waitress Voice; Episode: "Book of Corrine"
+ Music videos Year Title Role Notes 2010 Crossfire Mysterious and dangerous rescuer Song by Brandon Flowers
+ Producer Year Title Notes 2003 Monster Also actress 2006 East of Havana Documentary 2008 Sleepwalking Also actress 2008 The Burning Plain Executive, also actress 2014 Dark Places Also actress

Awards and nominations Year Nominated work Award Category Result1998Mighty Joe Young Saturn Award Best Supporting Actress 1999 The Cider House RulesBambi Award Shooting Star: Female Satellite Award Best Supporting Actress – Drama Screen Actors Guild Award Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion PictureTeen Choice Award Film – Choice Actress2001Sweet November Golden Raspberry Award Worst Actress2003 MonsterAcademy AwardBest ActressBritish Academy Film AwardsBest Actress in a Leading RoleCentral Ohio Film Critics Association Award Best ActressChicago Film Critics Association Award Best ActressCritics' Choice Movie Award Best ActressDallas-Fort Worth Film Critics Association Award Best ActressGolden Globe Award Best Actress – Motion Picture DramaIndependent Spirit Award Best Female LeadIrish Film & Television Award Best International Actress Las Vegas Film Critics Society Award Best Actress London Film Critics' Circle Award Actress of the Year Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award Best ActressMTV Movie AwardBest Female PerformanceMTV Movie AwardBest KissNational Board of Review Best Breakthrough Performance by an Actress National Society of Film Critics Award Best Actress New York Film Critics Circle Awards Best Actress New York Film Critics Online Awards Best Actress Online Film Critics Society Awards Best ActressSan Francisco Film Critics Circle Award Best ActressSatellite Award Best Actress – Motion Picture DramaScreen Actors Guild AwardOutstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading RoleSilver Bear (Silberner Bär) (tied with Catalina Sandino Moreno for Maria Full of Grace)Best ActressVancouver Film Critics Circle AwardBest Actress2004The Life and Death of Peter SellersGolden Globe Award Best Supporting Actress – Series, Miniseries, or Television FilmPrimetime Emmy AwardOutstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or MovieScreen Actors Guild AwardOutstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Miniseries or Television Movie2005North CountryAcademy AwardBest ActressBritish Academy Film Awards Best Actress in a Leading Role Critics' Choice Movie Award Best ActressDallas-Fort Worth Film Critics Association Award Best ActressGolden Globe Award Best Actress – Motion Picture DramaSatellite Award Best Actress – Motion Picture DramaScreen Actors Guild AwardOutstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading RoleSt. Louis Gateway Film Critics Association AwardsBest Actress Vancouver Film Critics Circle AwardsBest Actress Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association AwardBest Actress Women Film Critics Circle AwardsBest Female Images in a Movie Women Film Critics Circle AwardsBest Actress2008Hancock Saturn AwardBest Supporting Actress2009The Burning Plain Saturn Award Best Actress2011Young Adult Central Ohio Film Critics Association Award Best Actress Critics' Choice Movie Award Best Actress Dallas-Fort Worth Film Critics Association Award Best Actress Detroit Film Critics Society Award Best Actress Georgia Film Critics Association Award Best Actress Golden Globe AwardBest Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy National Board of ReviewBest Actress (runner-up)Palm Springs International Film Festival Chairman's Vanguard Award Satellite Award Best Actress – Motion Picture2012PrometheusTeen Choice Award Choice Summer Movie Star: FemalePeople's Choice Award Favorite Dramatic Movie ActressSnow White and the HuntsmanPeople's Choice Award Favorite Dramatic Movie ActressSaturn Award Best Supporting ActressTeen Choice AwardChoice Movie Hissy FitTeen Choice Award Choice Movie VillainTeen Choice AwardChoice Summer Movie Star: Female2015A Million Ways to Die in the West People's Choice Award Favorite Comedic Movie Actress Golden Raspberry Award Worst Actress Golden Raspberry Award Worst Screen Combo (with Seth MacFarlane) 

