A shock site is a website that is intended to be offensive, disgusting, or disturbing to its viewers. They contain material of high shock value that is considered distasteful and crude; the content is generally of a pornographic, scatological, graphically violent, insulting, painful, profane, or otherwise provocative nature. Some shock sites display a single picture, animation, video clip or a small gallery, and are often passed around via email or disguised in posts to discussion sites as a prank. Steven Jones distinguishes these sites from those that collect galleries of shocking content, such as Rotten.com, as the gallery sites must be actively searched for content.

Some shock sites have also gained their own subcultures and have become internet memes on their own. Goatse.cx featured a page devoted to fan-submitted artwork and tributes to the site's hello.jpg, and a parody of the image was unwittingly shown by a BBC newscast as an alternative for the then recently unveiled logo for the 2012 Summer Olympics. A 2007 shock video known as 2 Girls 1 Cup also quickly became an Internet phenomenon, with videos of reactions, homages, and parodies widely posted on video sharing sites such as YouTube.

Examples



Bestgore.com


BestGore.com is famous for its extremely graphic content such as murders, suicides and violent accidents in the form of photos and videos. It is currently the most visited shock website in the world, with an estimated 15 - 20 million monthly visits. On July 2013, the website's creator, Slovakian-Canadian Mark Marek, was charged with one count of "corrupting morals", related to his posting of the video of the murder of Lin Jun on his website. He was released on bail and is currently awaiting trial.

Goatse.cx


Goatse.cx was one of the best-known shock sites, featuring an image of a man stretching his anus with his hands. The site featured a page devoted to fan-submitted artwork and tributes to the site, and a parody of the image was also shown by a BBC newscast as an alternative for the then recently unveiled logo for the 2012 Summer Olympics.

The site was shut down in 2004; however, various mirror sites featuring the image still exist. In 2012, it was resurrected as an e-mail service.

Lemonparty
Lemonparty.org contains an image of three elderly naked men in a bed kissing and having oral sex. The song "If You Wanna Be Happy" by Jimmy Soul plays in the background. The image has been mentioned on some television shows, such as in a sketch on Talkshow with Spike Feresten, and dialogue on Archer, The Simpsons, The Cleveland Show and 30 Rock. The website has also been described by Jimmy Fallon on the Opie and Anthony radio show, on Chelsea Handler's TV show Chelsea Lately, Michael J. Nelson from RiffTrax.com during the RiffTrax for Avatar, by Jon Stewart on The Daily Show, and American Dad. The NBC show 30 Rock has made at least three allusions to a "Lemon party."

