l




Y is the twenty-fifth letter in the ISO basic Latin alphabet (next to last letter) and represents either a vowel or a consonant in English-language.

Name
In Latin, Y was named I graeca. This was pronounced as E grecka, since the classical Greek sound , similar to modern German ü or French u, was not a native sound for Latin speakers, and the letter was initially only used to spell foreign words. In Romance languages, this history has led to the standard modern name of the letter: In Galician i grego, in Catalan i grega, in French and Romanian i grec - all meaning "greek i". The names igrek in Polish and ' in Vietnamese are both phonetic borrowings of the French name. In Dutch, both Griekse ij and i-grec are used. In Spanish, Y is also called i griega, however, in the twentieth century, the shorter name ye was proposed and was officially recognized as its name in 2010 by the Real Academia Española, although its original name is still accepted. The original Greek name upsilon has also been adapted into several modern languages; in German, for example, it is called Ypsilon, and in Italian the name is ípsilon or ípsilo. In Portuguese, both names are used (ípsilon and i grego).

Old English borrowed Latin Y to write the native Old English sound . The name of the letter may be related to 'ui' (or 'vi') in various medieval languages; in Middle English it was 'wi' , which through the Great Vowel Shift became the Modern English 'wy' .

History

Semitic, Phoenician, Greek and Latin
The oldest direct ancestor of English letter Y was the Semitic letter waw, from which also come F, U, V, and W. See F for details. The Greek and Latin alphabets developed from the Phoenician form of this early alphabet. In Modern English, there is also some historical influence from the old English letter yogh (Ȝȝ), which developed from Semitic gimel, as shown below.
+Summary of the sources of Modern English "Y"  English (approximate times of changes) Old !! Middle !! Modern 75px 100px V → U → V/U/UU → V/U/W Y → Y (vowel /y/) → Y (vowel /i/) → Y (vowels) 75px 100px C → G → Ȝ (consonantal /g/ or /ɣ/) → G → consonantal Y /j/ → Y (consonant)

Vowel
Y first appeared as the Greek letter upsilon. The Romans borrowed a small form of upsilon as the single letter V, representing both the vowel sound and the consonant . (In modern ways of writing Latin, V is typically written as U, for a vowel, or V for the consonant.) However, this first loaning of upsilon into Latin is not the source of Modern English Y.

The usage of the capital form of upsilon, 'Y' as opposed to U, V, or W, dates back to the Latin of the first century BC, when upsilon was introduced a second time, this time with its "foot" to distinguish it. It was used to transcribe loanwords from the prestigious Attic dialect of Greek, which had the non-Latin sound , as found in modern French cru (raw), or German grün (green). Because it was not a native sound of Latin, it was usually pronounced or . The latter pronunciation was the most common in the Classical period and was used by most people except Greek educated ones.

The letter was also used for other languages with a /y/ sound. Some words of Italic origin were re-spelled with a 'y': Latin silva ('forest') was commonly spelled sylva, in analogy with the Greek cognate and synonym ὕλη.

The Roman Emperor Claudius proposed introducing a new letter into the Latin alphabet to transcribe the so-called sonus medius (a short vowel before labial consonants), which in inscriptions was sometimes used for Greek upsilon instead.

In Old English there was a native /y/ sound, and so both Latin U and Y were adapted for use. By the time of Middle English, had lost its roundedness and became identical to I . Therefore, many words that originally had I were spelled with Y, and vice-versa. 

Likewise, Modern English vocalic Y is pronounced identically to the letter I. But Modern English uses it in only certain places, unlike Middle and early Modern English. It has three uses: for upsilon in Greek loan-words (system: Greek σύστημα), at the end of a word (rye, city; compare cities, where S is final), and before vowel endings (dy-ing, justify-ing).

Consonant
As a consonant in English, Y is normally a palatal approximant, (year, German Jahr). This is possibly influenced by the Middle English letter yogh (Ȝȝ), which represented . (Yogh's other sound, , came to be written gh in Middle English, and although the sound is no longer pronounced in standard modern English silent gh is common in many words where this sound was once present, such as through and caught, and in some cases an sound has resulted in modern English, as in rough or trough.)

Orthographic confusion with the letter thorn
When printing was introduced to Great Britain, Caxton and other English printers used Y in place of Þ (thorn: Modern English th), which did not exist in continental typefaces. From this convention comes the spelling of the as ye in the mock archaism Ye Olde Shoppe. But in spite of the spelling, pronunciation was the same as for modern the . Ye is purely a modern spelling pronunciation.

Usage

English
The letter Y was originally established as a vowel. In the standard English alphabet, the letter Y is traditionally regarded as a consonant, but a survey of almost any English text will show that Y more commonly functions as a vowel.

As j:
* at the beginning of a word as in yes
* after some vowels in diphthongs, as in play, Dmitriy, grey, boy
As i:
* without stress at the end of multi-syllable word as in baby, happy
* used in combination with e at the end of words, as in money, key
As ɪ:
* in a closed syllable without stress and with stress as in myth, system, gymnastics
* in a closed syllable under stress as in typical, lyric
* in an open syllable without stress as in physique, pyjamas
As ai:
* under stress in an open syllable as in my, type, rye, lying, pyre, tyre, typhoon
* in a stressed open syllable as in hyphen, cycle, cylon
* in the following words: ally, hypothesis, psychology
Other:
* combining with r as ɜ under stress (like i in bird), as in myrtle, myrrh
* as schwa (ə) in words like martyr

In English morphology, -y is an adjectival suffix.

Other Germanic languages
Y has the sound values or in the Scandinavian languages and in German. It can never be a consonant (except for loanwords), but can in German appear in diphthongs, as in the name Meyer, where it serves as a variant of . In Norwegian it forms part of the diphthong , which in Swedish is spelled and in Danish.

In Dutch, Y appears only in loanwords and names and usually represents . It may sometimes be left out of the Dutch alphabet and replaced with the ligature IJ. In addition, the Y is occasionally used instead of an IJ, albeit very rarely. In the Afrikaans language, a descendant of Dutch, Y denotes the diphthong , which may derive from the IJ ligature.

The Icelandic writing system uses y for /ɪ/ and ý for /i/. In Faroese, Y is always pronounced . In both languages, it can also form part of diphthongs such as (in both languages) and (Faroese only).

French
In French orthography y is identical to i in pronunciation. It is pronounced as i when a vowel (as in the words "cycle", "y") and as j as a consonant (as in "yeux", "voyez"). It alternates orthographically with i in the conjugations of some verbs, indicating a j sound.

In French Y can have a diaresis (tréma) as in Moÿ-de-l'Aisne.

Spanish
In the Spanish language, Y was used as a word-initial form of I that was more visible. (German has used J in a similar way.) Hence el yugo y las flechas was a symbol sharing the initials of Isabella I of Castille (Ysabel) and Ferdinand II of Aragon. This spelling was reformed by the Royal Spanish Academy and currently is only found in proper names spelled archaically, such as Ybarra or CYII, the symbol of the Canal de Isabel II.

Appearing alone as a word, the letter Y is a grammatical conjunction with the meaning "and" in Spanish and is pronounced .
In Spanish family names, y can separate the father's surname from the mother's surname as in Santiago Ramón y Cajal; another example is Maturin y Domanova, from the Aubrey-Maturin series. Catalan names use i for this. As a consonant y represents in Spanish. When coming before the sound , the conjunction Y is replaced with E: español e inglés. This is to avoid pronouncing twice.

The letter Y is called i/y griega, literally meaning "Greek I", after the Greek letter ypsilon, or ye.

Portuguese
In Portuguese, Y (called ípsilon in Brazil, both ípsilon or i grego in Portugal) was, together with K and W, recently re-introduced as the 25th letter, and 19th consonant, of the Portuguese alphabet, in consequence of the Portuguese Language Orthographic Agreement of 1990.

It is mostly used in loanwords from English, Japanese, Spanish, Russian and Hebrew. Loanwords in general, primarily gallicisms in both varieties, are more common in Brazilian Portuguese than in European Portuguese. It was always common for Brazilians to stylize Tupi-influenced names of their children with the letter (which is present in most romanizations of Old Tupi) e.g. Guaracy, Jandyra, Mayara – though placenames and loanwords derived from Indigenous origins had the letter substituted for over time e.g. Nictheroy became Niterói.

To a minor degree (often stigmatized as a signal of the lower classes) it is also true for common Western/Christian in Brazil, together with those of immigrant communities, although the practice is not possible in Portugal where names are required to follow official spelling conventions (see more at Portuguese name).

Usual pronunciations are , , and . The letters and are regarded as phonemically not dissimilar, though the first corresponds to a vowel and the latter to a consonant, and both can correspond to a semivowel depending on its place in a word.

Other languages
Italian, too, has Y (ipsilon) in a small number of loanwords.

In Polish and Guaraní, it represents the vowel .

In Welsh it is pronounced non-final syllables, and or (depending on the accent) in final syllables.

In Finnish and Albanian, Y is always pronounced .

In Lithuanian Y is the 15th letter and is a vowel. It is called the long i and is pronounced like in English see.

When used as a vowel in Vietnamese, the letter y represents the sound ; when it is a monophthong, it is functionally equivalent to the Vietnamese letter i. Thus, Mỹ Lai does not rhyme but mỳ Lee does. There have been efforts to replace all such uses with i altogether, but they have been largely unsuccessful. As a consonant, it represents the palatal approximant. The capital letter Y is also used in Vietnamese as a given name.

In Aymara, Turkish, Quechua and the romanization of Japanese, Y is always a palatal consonant, denoting , as in English.

In Malagasy, the letter y represents the final variation of .

In Turkmen, Y represents .

In Japan, Ⓨ is a symbol used for resale price maintenance.

International Phonetic Alphabet
In the International Phonetic Alphabet, corresponds to the close front rounded vowel, and the slightly different character corresponds to the near-close near-front rounded vowel.

It is indicative of the rarity of front rounded vowels that is the rarest sound represented in the IPA by a letter of the Latin alphabet, being cross-linguistically less than half as frequent as or and only about a quarter as frequent as .

The IPA symbol ("jod") represents the sound of the English letter in the word yes.

Related letters and other similar characters
*Ƴ ƴ : Latin Y with hook
*Υ υ : Greek letter Upsilon
*У у : Cyrillic letter U
* : Cyrillic letter Ue (Straight U)
*Ы ы : Cyrillic letter Yery, commonly romanized as 
*י : Hebrew letter yodh
* : a currency symbol



Computing codes

 

Other representations


