The Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award (MVP) is an annual Major League Baseball (MLB) award, given to one outstanding player in the American League and one in the National League. Since 1931, it has been awarded by the Baseball Writers' Association of America (BBWAA). The winners receive the Kenesaw Mountain Landis Memorial Baseball Award, which became the official name of the award in 1944, in honor of the first MLB commissioner, who served from 1920 until his death on November 25, 1944.

MVP voting takes place before the postseason, but the results are not announced until after the World Series. The BBWAA began by polling three writers in each league city in 1938, reducing that number to two per league city in 1961. The BBWAA does not offer a clear-cut definition of what "most valuable" means, instead leaving the judgment to the individual voters.

First basemen, with 34 winners, have won the most MVPs among infielders, followed by second basemen (16), third basemen (15), and shortstops (15). Of the 24 pitchers who have won the award, 15 are right-handed while 9 are left-handed. Walter Johnson, Carl Hubbell, and Hal Newhouser are the only pitchers who have won multiple times, Newhouser winning consecutively in 1944 and 1945.

Hank Greenberg, Stan Musial, Alex Rodriguez, and Robin Yount have won at different positions, while Rodriguez is the only player who has won the award with two different teams at two different positions. Barry Bonds has won the most often (seven times) and the most consecutively (2001–04). Jimmie Foxx was the first player to win multiple times; 9 players have won three times, and 19 have won twice. Frank Robinson is the only player to win the award in both the American and National Leagues.

The award's only tie occurred in the National League in 1979, when Keith Hernandez and Willie Stargell received an equal number of points. There have been 17 unanimous winners, who received all the first-place votes. The New York Yankees have the most winning players with 22, followed by the St. Louis Cardinals with 17 winners. The award has never been presented to a member of the following five teams: Arizona Diamondbacks, Miami Marlins, New York Mets, Tampa Bay Rays, and Washington Nationals. The most recent recipients are Mike Trout in the American League and Clayton Kershaw in the National League.

In recent decades, pitchers have rarely won the award. When Justin Verlander won the AL award in 2011, he became the first pitcher in either league to be named the MVP since Dennis Eckersley in 1992. Verlander also became the first starting pitcher to win this award since Roger Clemens had accomplished the feat in 1986. The National League went even longer without an MVP award to a pitcher—after Bob Gibson won in 1968, no pitcher in that league was named MVP until Kershaw in 2014.

Chalmers Award (1911–1914)
Before the 1910 season, Hugh Chalmers of Chalmers Automobile announced he would present a Chalmers Model 30 automobile to the player with the highest batting average in Major League Baseball at the end of the season. The 1910 race for best average in the American League was between the Detroit Tigers' widely disliked Ty Cobb and Nap Lajoie of the Cleveland Indians. On the last day of the season, Lajoie overtook Cobb's batting average with seven bunt hits against the St. Louis Browns. American League President Ban Johnson said a recalculation showed that Cobb had won the race anyway, and Chalmers ended up awarding cars to both players.

The following season, Chalmers created the Chalmers Award. A committee of baseball writers were to convene after the season to determine the "most important and useful player to the club and to the league". Since the award was not as effective at advertising as Chalmers had hoped, it was discontinued after 1914.
YearAmerican League winnerTeamPositionNational League winnerTeamPositionRefDetroit Tigers OFChicago Cubs OF Boston Red Sox OF 2B RHP 1B 2B 2B 

League Awards (1922–1929)
In 1922 the American League created a new award to honor "the baseball player who is of the greatest all-around service to his club". Winners, voted on by a committee of eight baseball writers chaired by James Crusinberry, received a bronze medal and a cash prize. Voters were required to select one player from each team and player-coaches and prior award winners were ineligible. These flaws resulted in the award's being dropped after 1928. The National League award, without these restrictions, lasted from 1924 to 1929.
YearAmerican League winnerTeamPositionNational League winnerTeamPositionRef 1B— New York Yankees OF— RHP RHP SSSt. Louis Cardinals 2B Cleveland Indians 1BSt. Louis Cardinals C New York Yankees 1BPittsburgh Pirates OF CSt. Louis Cardinals 1B — Chicago Cubs 2B 

Baseball Writers' Association of America's Most Valuable Player (1931–present)
The BBWAA first awarded the modern MVP after the 1931 season, adopting the format the National League used to distribute its league award. One writer in each city with a team filled out a ten-place ballot, with ten points for the recipient of a first-place vote, nine for a second-place vote, and so on. In 1938, the BBWAA raised the number of voters to three per city and gave 14 points for a first-place vote. The only significant change since then occurred in 1961, when the number of voters was reduced to two per league city.

 Ref

 † LHP † St. Louis Cardinals 2B 
 † 1B † Philadelphia Phillies OF 
 † (2) 1B † LHP 
 † (2) Detroit Tigers C † St. Louis Cardinals RHP 
 †§ Detroit Tigers 1B † Chicago Cubs C † (2) New York Yankees 1B †§ (2) LHP 
 † Detroit Tigers 2B † St. Louis Cardinals OF 
 † (3) Boston Red Sox 1B † Cincinnati Reds C 
 † New York Yankees OF Cincinnati Reds RHP 
 † (2) Detroit Tigers OF Cincinnati Reds 1B 
 † (2) New York Yankees OF 1B 
 † New York Yankees 2B St. Louis Cardinals RHP 
 New York Yankees RHP † St. Louis Cardinals OF 
 † Detroit Tigers LHP St. Louis Cardinals SS 
 † (2) Detroit Tigers LHP Chicago Cubs 1B 
 † Boston Red Sox OF † (2) St. Louis Cardinals 1B 
 † (3) New York Yankees OF 3B 
 † Cleveland Indians SS † (3) St. Louis Cardinals OF 
 † (2) Boston Red Sox OF † 2B 
 † New York Yankees SS Philadelphia Phillies RHP 
 † New York Yankees C † C LHP Chicago Cubs OF 
 § Cleveland Indians 3B † (2) C 
 † (2) New York Yankees C † OF 
 † (3) New York Yankees C † (3) C 
 †§ New York Yankees OF RHP 
 † (2) New York Yankees OF † OF 
 Boston Red Sox OF † Chicago Cubs SS 
† Chicago White Sox 2B † (2) Chicago Cubs SS 
 New York Yankees OF Pittsburgh Pirates SS 
 (2) New York Yankees OF †§ Cincinnati Reds OF 
† (3) New York Yankees OF Los Angeles Dodgers SS New York Yankees C † Los Angeles Dodgers LHP † Baltimore Orioles 3B St. Louis Cardinals 3B Minnesota Twins SS † (2) San Francisco Giants OF †§ (2) Baltimore Orioles OF † Pittsburgh Pirates OF † Boston Red Sox OF †§ St. Louis Cardinals 1B § Detroit Tigers RHP † St. Louis Cardinals RHP † Minnesota Twins 3B † San Francisco Giants 1B Baltimore Orioles 1B † Cincinnati Reds C Oakland Athletics LHP † St. Louis Cardinals 3B Chicago White Sox 1B † (2) Cincinnati Reds C †§ Oakland Athletics OF Cincinnati Reds OF Texas Rangers OF Los Angeles Dodgers 1B Boston Red Sox OF † Cincinnati Reds 2B New York Yankees C † (2) Cincinnati Reds 2B † Minnesota Twins 1B Cincinnati Reds OF † Boston Red Sox OF Pittsburgh Pirates OF DH St. Louis Cardinals 1B † Pittsburgh Pirates 1B † Kansas City Royals 3B †§ Philadelphia Phillies 3B † Milwaukee Brewers RHP † (2) Philadelphia Phillies 3B † Milwaukee Brewers SS Atlanta Braves OF † Baltimore Orioles SS (2) Atlanta Braves OF Detroit Tigers LHP † Chicago Cubs 2B New York Yankees 1B St. Louis Cardinals OF Boston Red Sox RHP † (3) Philadelphia Phillies 3B Toronto Blue Jays OF † Chicago Cubs OF § Oakland Athletics OF Los Angeles Dodgers OF † (2) Milwaukee Brewers OF San Francisco Giants OF † Oakland Athletics OF Pittsburgh Pirates OF † (2) Baltimore Orioles SS Atlanta Braves 3B † Oakland Athletics RHP (2) Pittsburgh Pirates OF †§ Chicago White Sox 1B (3) San Francisco Giants OF † (2) Chicago White Sox 1B § Houston Astros 1B Boston Red Sox 1B † Cincinnati Reds SS Texas Rangers OF § San Diego Padres 3B § Seattle Mariners OF Colorado Rockies OF (2) Texas Rangers OF Chicago Cubs OF Texas Rangers C Atlanta Braves 3B ^ Oakland Athletics 1B San Francisco Giants 2B ^ Seattle Mariners OF (4) San Francisco Giants OF ^ Oakland Athletics SS § (5) San Francisco Giants OF ^ Texas Rangers SS (6) San Francisco Giants OF OF (7) San Francisco Giants OF ^ (2) New York Yankees 3B ^ St. Louis Cardinals 1B ^ Minnesota Twins 1B ^ Philadelphia Phillies 1B ^ (3) New York Yankees 3B ^ Philadelphia Phillies SS ^ Boston Red Sox 2B ^ (2) St. Louis Cardinals 1B ^ Minnesota Twins C ^§ (3) St. Louis Cardinals 1B ^ Texas Rangers OF ^ Cincinnati Reds 1B ^ Detroit Tigers RHP ^ Milwaukee Brewers OF ^ Detroit Tigers 3B ^ San Francisco Giants C ^ (2) Detroit Tigers 3B ^ Pittsburgh Pirates OF ^§ Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim OF ^ Los Angeles Dodgers LHP 

KeyYearLinks to the article about the corresponding Major League Baseball seasonMember of the National Baseball Hall of Fame as a player^Denotes player who is still active§Unanimous selectionPlayer Denotes winning player and number of times they had won the award at that pointPPitcher (RHP indicates right-handed; LHP indicates left-handed)CCatcher1BFirst baseman2BSecond baseman3BThird basemanSSShortstopOFOutfielderDHDesignated hitter

