Īao Valley is a lush, stream-cut valley in West Maui, Hawaii, located west of Wailuku. Because of its natural beauty and historical significance, it has become a popular tourist location. It was designated a National Natural Landmark in 1972. 

 Īao Valley State Monument 

The state park is located on at the end of Īao Valley Road (Highway 32). The Īao Needle (Kūkaemoku) is a famous landmark in the state park, a vegetation-covered lava remnant rising from the valley floor or when measured from sea level. The "needle" itself is an illusion, and is in reality a sharp ridge that gives the appearance of being a spire when viewed end-on. The needle is an extension of and surrounded by the cliffs of the West Maui Mountains, an extinct volcano. One can take a short trail to a windy overlook. Park hours are from 7 am to 7 pm.

 Rainforest 
Īao Valley is covered in dense rainforest, most of which consists of introduced vegetation on the valley floor. The Puu Kukui summit area at the valley's head receives an average of rainfall per year, making it the state's second wettest location after Mount Waialeale. Much of this rainfall ends up flowing into the Īao Stream. Trails in the State Park run alongside Īao Stream and through the forest.

 History 
The Hawaiian god Kāne is considered to be the procreator and the provider of life. He is associated with wai (fresh water) as well as clouds, rain, streams, and springs. Kanaloa, the Hawaiian god of the underworld, is represented by the phallic stone of the Īao Needle. 

Kapawa, the king of Hawaii prior to Pili, was buried here. Maui's ruler Kakae, in the late 15th century, designated Īao Valley as an alii burial ground. The remains were buried in secret places. In 1790, the Battle of Kepaniwai took place there, in which Kamehameha the Great defeated Kalanikūpule and the Maui army during his campaign to unify the islands. The battle was said to be so bloody that dead bodies blocked Īao Stream, and the battle site was named Kepaniwai ("the damming of the waters").

20th Century Fox's 1997 motion picture Turbo: A Power Rangers Movie was partially filmed here.

 Kepaniwai Park's Heritage Gardens 
Since 1952, Kepaniwai Park's Heritage Gardens have memorialized Maui's multicultural history. Scale models of ethnic buildings and gardens representing the immigration of Hawaiian, American missionary, Chinese, Japanese, Portuguese, Korean, and Filipino cultures are the park's highlight. The gardens were restored in 1994. The Hawaii nature center is located just outside the gardens, which provides access to a museum and children's education about Hawaii and conservation.

