Z (named zed ' or zee ) is the twenty-sixth and final letter of the ISO basic Latin alphabet.

Name and pronunciation
In most dialects of English, the letter's name is 'zed' , reflecting its derivation from the Greek zeta (this dates to Latin, which borrowed X, Y and Z from Greek, along with their names), but in American English its name is 'zee' , analogous to the names for B, C, D, etc., and deriving from a late 17th century English dialectal form.

Another English dialectal form is izzard . It dates from the mid-18th century and probably derives from Occitan izèda or the French ézed, whose reconstructed Latin form would be *idzēta, perhaps a popular form with a prosthetic vowel.

Other languages spell the letter's name in a similar way: zeta in Italian, Spanish and Icelandic (no longer part of its alphabet but found in personal names), zäta in Swedish, zæt in Danish, zet in Dutch, Polish, Romanian and Czech, Zett in German (capitalised as noun), zett in Norwegian, zède in French, zê in Portuguese, and ' in Vietnamese. Several languages render it as or , e.g. zeta or in Finnish. In Standard Chinese pinyin the name of the letter Z is pronounced , although the English 'zed' and American English 'zee' have become very common.

History PhoenicianZayin EtruscanZ GreekZeta 30px 25px 45px

Semitic
The Semitic symbol was the seventh letter, named zayin which possibly meant "weapon". It represented either as in English and French, or possibly more like (as in Italian zeta, zero).

Greek
The Greek form of Z was a close copy of the Phoenician zen (Zayin), and the Greek inscriptional form remained in this shape throughout ancient times. The Greeks called it zeta, a new name made in imitation of eta (η) and theta (θ).

In earlier Greek of Athens and Northwest Greece, the letter seems to have represented ; in Attic, from the 4th century BC onwards, it seems to have stood for and , and in fact there is no consensus concerning this issue. In other dialects, as Elean and Cretan, the symbol seems to have been used for sounds resembling the English voiced and voiceless th . In the common dialect (koine) that succeeded the older dialects, ζ became , as it remains in modern Greek.

Etruscan
Etruscan letter Z derived from phoenician alphabet, most probably through the Greek alphabet used in Ischia island. In Etruscan, this letter may have represented .

Latin

The letter z was part of the earliest form of the Latin alphabet, adopted from Etruscan. Because the sound in Latin changed to by rhotacism in the fifth century BC, z was dropped and its place given to the new letter g. In the 1st century BC, z was introduced again at the end of the Latin alphabet to represent the sound of the Greek zeta , as the letter y was introduced to represent the sound of the Greek upsilon .

Before the reintroduction of z, the sound of zeta was written s at the beginning of words and ss in the middle of words, as in sōna for ζώνη "belt" and trapessita for τραπεζίτης "banker".

In Vulgar Latin orthography, z represented a sound, likely an affricate, formed by the merging of the reflexes of Classical Latin , and : for example, zanuariu for ianuariu "January", ziaconus for diaconus "deacon", and oze for hodie "today". Likewise, sometimes replaced in words like baptidiare for baptizare "to baptize". In modern Italian, z represents or , whereas the reflexes of ianuarius and hodie are written with the letter g : gennaio, oggi. In other languages like Spanish, further evolution of the sound occurred.

Early English
Early English used S alone for both the unvoiced and the voiced sibilant. The Latin sound imported through French was new and was not written with Z but with G or I. The successive changes can be well seen in the double forms from the same original, jealous and zealous. Both of these come from a late Latin zelosus, derived from the imported Greek ζῆλος zêlos. The earlier form is jealous; its initial sound is the which developed to Modern French . John Wycliffe wrote the word as gelows or ielous.

Z at the end of a word was pronounced ts, as in English assets, from Old French asez "enough" (Modern French assez), from Vulgar Latin ad satis ("to sufficiency").

Last letter of the alphabet
In earlier times, the English alphabets used by children terminated not with Z but with & or related typographic symbols. www.shadycharacters.co.uk/wp/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/alphabet-e1309627843933.jpg In her 1859 novel Adam Bede, George Eliot refers to Z being followed by & when her character Jacob Storey says, "He thought it had only been put to finish off th' alphabet like; though ampusand would ha' done as well, for what he could see."

Some Latin based alphabets have extra letters, such as the Icelandic and Swedish making Ö the last one or Å in case of the Danish and Norwegian alphabets or Ä in the Finnish alphabet.

 Variant and derived forms 
A glyph variant of Z originating in the medieval Gothic minuscules and the Early Modern Blackletter typefaces is the "tailed z" (German geschwänztes Z, also Z mit Unterschlinge). In some Antiqua typefaces, this letter is present as a standalone letter or in ligatures. Combined with long s (ſ), it is the origin of the ß (Eszett) ligature in the German alphabet.

Z in an Antiqua typeface may be identical with the character representing 3 in other fonts.

A graphical variant of tailed Z is Ezh, as adopted into the International Phonetic Alphabet as the sign for the voiced postalveolar fricative. Tailed Z is to be distinguished from the similar insular G and yogh found in Old English, Irish, Middle English, etc.

Unicode assigns codepoints and in the Letterlike Symbols and Mathematical alphanumeric symbols ranges respectively.

 

Use in English
In modern English orthography the letter 'z' usually represents the sound .

Z represents in words like 'azure' or 'seizure'. More often, this sound appears as 'su' or 'si' in words such as 'measure', 'decision', etc. In all these words, developed from earlier by yod-coalescence.

Few words in the Basic English vocabulary begin with Z, though it occurs in words beginning with other letters. It is the most rarely used letter in written English. It is more common in American English than in British English, as with the endings '-ize'/'-ise' and '-ization'/'-isation', where the American spelling is derived from Greek and the British from French. 'Z' is more common in the Oxford spelling of British English, as this variant prefers the more etymologically 'correct' '-ize' endings to '-ise' endings; '-yse' is preferred over '-yze' in Oxford spelling though, as it is closer to the original Greek roots of words like 'analyse'. One native Germanic English word that contains 'z', 'freeze' (past 'froze', participle 'frozen') came to be spelled that way by convention, even though it could have been spelled with 's' (as with 'choose', 'chose', 'chosen').

Z is used in writing to represent the act of sleeping (sometimes as 'zzz' or 'zzzz'). It is used because closed-mouth human snoring often sounds like the pronunciation of this letter. 

Use in other languages

Z stands for a voiced alveolar or voiced dental sibilant , in Albanian, Breton, Czech, Dutch, French, Hungarian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Romanian, Serbo-Croatian, Slovak, and the International Phonetic Alphabet. It stands for in Chinese pinyin, Finnish, and German, and it likewise expressed /ts/ in Old Norse. In Italian, it represents two phonemes, and . Castilian Spanish uses the letter to represent (as English 'th' in 'thing'), though in other dialects (Latin American, Andalusian) this sound has merged with . In Portuguese, it stands for in most cases, but also for or (depending on the regional variant) at the end of syllables.

In Danish, Norwegian and Swedish Z usually stands for the sound /s/ and thus shares the value of S; it normally occurs only in loans that are spelt with Z in the source languages. There is no minimal pair differentiated only by s and z. 

The letter Z on its own represents in the Polish language. It is also used in four of the seven officially recognized digraphs: 'cz' , 'dz' , 'rz' and 'sz' ; and is the most frequently used of the consonants in that language. (Other Slavic languages avoid digraphs and mark the corresponding phonemes with the háček (caron) accent: č, ď, ř, š; this system has its origin in Czech orthography of the Hussite period.) Two more Polish digraphs include Z with diacritical marks, as accent and dot: 'dź' and 'dż' . Z can also appear alone with diacritical marks, namely ź	or ż. Similarly, Hungarian uses Z in the characteristic digraphs 'sz' and zs .

Among non-European languages that have adopted the Latin alphabet, 'z' usually stands for z, such as in Azerbaijani, Igbo, Indonesian, Shona, Swahili, Tatar, Turkish, Turkmen, and Zulu.

In the Kunrei-shiki and Hepburn romanisations of Japanese, 'z' stands for a phoneme whose allophones include and .

Mathematics usage
In mathematics, is used to denote the set of integers. Originally was just a handwritten version of the bold capital Z used in printing but, over time, it has come to be used more frequently in printed works too.

Related letters and other similar characters
*Ζ ζ : Greek letter Zeta
 
*З з : Cyrillic letter Ze
* : Latin letter Ezh
*Ᵹ ᵹ : Insular G
*Ȝ ȝ : Yogh
*ז : Hebrew letter Zayin

Computing codes

 

Other representations


